# Data Science Insight 1

### Shenk, Linda, et al. "Agents of change - together: Using agent-based models to inspire social capital building for resilient communities." Community Development 50, no. 2 (2019): 256-272.

#### Main takeaways from the article (summary):

Agent-based modeling is well-suited for use in planning and policymaking as well as inspiring the bonding, bridging, and linking of social capital crucial for community resilience. Indeed, social capital—as the social ties that connect individuals and groups—empowers communities to come together to take positive, collective action. This capital initiates widening circles of momentum and change that, in particular, allows vulnerable communities to “spiral back up” to a culture of hope, agency, and adaptive behavior. Because ABM can be used to perform experiments that test the effects of changing environmental parameters and/or agent attributes on outcomes, it is playing an increasing role in participatory processes for socio-environmental decision-making. The team in this study uses social-thermal-physical computational models that integrate social-behavioral processes, built environment, and natural systems to support civic decision-making. ABM enables researchers and stakeholders to explore how the decisions of these individual agents (i.e. at the micro-level) can lead to changes in overall system behavior (i.e. at the macro-level). A weatherization model includes sub-models on initialization, agent satisfaction evaluation, information sharing, and agent decision-making. The ABM is paired with a youth-oriented intervention similar to collective capacity building; the ABM is used as a storytelling vehicle in some ways.

#### Sans-jargon explanation:

Agent-based modeling was used as a primary method in a community-based project to improve the energy efficiency of households in a group of neighborhoods. In this project, an agent-based model was presented as a module in each phase of a project involving youth volunteers. The participants were able to interact with the model on their computers and see how the small actions they make or small environmental changes (e.g., the creation of a new green space in the community) amount to much larger changes in the system (i.e., energy efficiency of households) over time. The agent-based model is used here both as a method of experimenting (observing combinations and situations which never happened) and boosting individual and collective capacity as an educational/storytelling device.