# Data Science Knowledge Creation

Data science (DS) and its use in agent-based modeling (ABM) serve to advance our understanding of complex adaptive, economic and social systems in several dimensions of human life. This paper focuses on their application specifically to the field of global development--the creation of a secure, sustainable, and vibrant world (both in more and less developed countries) and hereafter referred to simply as development. In other words, the generalized social, political, and economic progression of humankind. This definition of development is broad, but so are the systems that we are attempting to model. DS and ABM provide us with news means of identifying what matters for development, running quasi-experiments by simulating real-world phenomena, communicating our new understandings through visualization, and—ultimately—contributing to our interactions with the very systems we are modeling.

How do we identify what matters for promoting development? Historians use process tracing, storytelling, and other qualitative methodologies to arrive at carefully curated narratives of how we got from the past to present. Economists use models and econometrics to study correlations, trying their best to discern causality. Data scientists use principal component analysis and other machine learning techniques to identify which combinations of factors have the greatest predictive power, but sacrifice being able to see what happens in the so-called “black box.” What can data scientists provide that fills a gap in existing methods? For starters, we can process massive amounts of data at unprecedented speeds to pick out the parts that matter. Dealing with complex systems which capture everything from where actors travel to how much money is in their pocket, being able to process a lot of data is valuable. ABM and forms of predictive analytics are being used to inform development interventions such as where to locate clinics and schools based on projected population growth and environmental factors. I anticipate that as computing power rises and proliferates to more remote and rural places currently without internet access, we will gain better understandings--through data collection and modeling--of how to promote development in remote areas.

With better data of currently offline areas of the world, we will get even closer to running quasi-experiments of human interactions. Where and how do people migrate? When and for what reasons? These are questions that we have been able to partly answer in the past through other methods of analysis, but data-driven methods will provide us with more precise answers. This precision will enable us to better project where demands for resources, such as clinics and schools, will rise. However, I do worry about the uses of data when it is used ignorantly and asymmetrically. I do not believe big data is a cure all. When its application rests upon a strong and relevant theoretical foundation and the data has been collected ethically and effectively, it can be useful for improving our modeling. Though, when our data-driven actions are solely based in the data we have, and not the actual world we observe, we can contribute to more harm than good. In my first semester at William & Mary, I learned a valuable lesson from a health development research team I was a part of: “good intentions are not enough. Effective action requires understanding, intentionality, and systematic empirical data.” We must build models based in theory, lest we be caught unaware by poorly collected, biased data or other trivial mistakes which could cause serious harm at aggregate. Further, DS should not be kept in the hands of few to be used on the lives of many. Especially in development, we must apply DS through multi-stakeholder partnerships which involve online local actors who are knowledgeable of the communities that we are trying to model.

DS can also greatly improve our understanding of complex systems through visualization. In development, problems and solutions are the product of how they are framed. Visualizing the systems we study helps us communicate our beliefs with other people who can support the development agenda. Whether it is a map of the modeled community showing actors migrating, like we did in class, or a decision tree which shows how our model works, visualization simplifies communication. Furthermore, data appeals to development policymaking and agenda-setting because quantifiable data is easier to measure. It is not within the scope of this paper to address how number-oriented agenda-setting can be problematic, but nonetheless, it is a way that DS impacts how we think about development, how we visualize our ideas and results, and how we communicate those with others.

Lastly, and unsurprisingly, how we use DS and ABM impacts how we interact with the very systems we are trying to model. The places we locate clinics and schools will receive more traffic and require greater infrastructural development in the future until demand is great enough to build another set of clinics and schools in the neighboring town. If our data collection fails to be impartial and unbiased, some individuals will be left out of our DS-based solutions. If this happens repeatedly, the marginalized and least represented people will become worse off while others’ status of living improve. In development, the hardest places to collect accurate data are in informal settlements (i.e., urban/para-urban slums) and remote/rural places. If our DS-based solutions do not address the needs of these populations because they were not accurately represented in our ABM, they will fall deeper into a cycle of poverty.

So, for both DS and ABM specifically, there is much promise for all the ways they can improve our understanding of the world. Though, it will not be easy. Any missteps along the way will influence not only future data and models but, more importantly, human lives. As we attempt to eliminate unfreedoms like poverty, lack of access to education, and poor healthcare, we must not let good intentions lead us to unequitable outcomes. We must also be strict about how much we let our lives be controlled by big data and the people/companies/governments that own it. Mass data collection and artificial intelligence can be used to promote unfreedoms like political oppression too. Ultimately, how we use DS and ABM to model systems must be ethical, equitable, and theory-based in addition to effective.